###########
 Streaming
###########

*****
 Why
*****

The Nuitka development will hopefully become richer by me developing
online one day per week. Maybe more or less often, but I believe on a
regular basis will be best.

*****
 How
*****

On Discord, we will have a Streaming room. There is a react bot, that
you can use to be automatically notified by Discord, when a Stream is
started, this one is in: https://discord.gg/nZ9hr9tUck the welcome
channel of the Discord.

The main chat on Gitter will be linked a chat room on Discord, so for
people not on Discord, they still have that available.

The stream will be recorded in Youtube and later put online, maybe only
a few excerpts, not sure how good it's going to be. There will be
quality issues in the beginning. And I don't want to spend a lot of time
editing material that might not get watched at all.

Discord will be used for a call-in part. I will unmute people and
discuss one on one with viewers, live on air, answering questions.

And then, I have setup OBS with a camera view and my desktop shared, and
I expect to be streaming to Youtube on my existing channel that I
cleaned up a bit: https://www.youtube.com/c/KayHayen

******
 When
******

I believe the weekend should be used. Not sure yet when exactly I can
start, I am aiming for mid January right now, with a test stream before
that.

I plan to stream with one lunch/sports break, on my CEST morning and an
afternoon or evening time, and maybe if I get carried away, more often.

******
 What
******

My idea is to take on challenging topics, e.g. making code
specialization of ``INT`` ``LONG`` and ``CLONG`` work for code like
``some_int += 2``, where the ``2`` is currently used as a prepared
``INT`` or ``LONG`` object (depending on Python version).

In a test stream, it worked really well to commonly improve the web
site. Documentation and generally clarification would be good, but I
think there also needs to be some plan, like making a certain piece of
code quicker. I will be asking for submissions on Twitter and/or in a
blog post.

**************
 Anouncements
**************

I think I could e.g. go with streaming on Sunday and announcing the
topic on Friday in a blog post, and/or a Twitter post. Then when going
live, a Discord ping is done. Gitter chat will also get a text message.
Youtube has the bell, that I might ask people to use, but I don't like
asking these things.
