.. post:: 2012/08/18 21:30
   :tags: compiler, Python, Nuitka
   :author: Kay Hayen

#######################
 Nuitka Release 0.3.24
#######################

This is to inform you about the new stable release of `Nuitka
<https://nuitka.net>`_. It is the extremely compatible Python compiler,
`"download now" </doc/download.html>`_.

This release contains progress on many fronts, except performance.

The extended coverage from running the CPython 2.7 and CPython 3.2
(partially) test suites shows in a couple of bug fixes and general
improvements in compatibility.

Then there is a promised new feature that allows to compile whole
packages.

Also there is more Python3 compatibility, the CPython 3.2 test suite now
succeeds up to "test_builtin.py", where it finds that ``str`` doesn't
support the new parameters it has gained, future releases will improve
on this.

And then of course, more re-formulation work, in this case, class
definitions are now mere simple functions. This and later function
references, is the important and only progress towards type inference.

***********
 Bug fixes
***********

-  The compiled method type can now be used with ``copy`` module. That
   means, instances with methods can now be copied too. Fixed in
   0.3.23.1 already.

-  The ``assert`` statement as of Python2.7 creates the
   ``AssertionError`` object from a given value immediately, instead of
   delayed as it was with Python2.6. This makes a difference for the
   form with 2 arguments, and if the value is a tuple. Fixed in 0.3.23.1
   already.

-  Sets written like this didn't work unless they were predicted at
   compile time:

   .. code:: python

      {value}

   This apparently rarely used Python2.7 syntax didn't have code
   generation yet and crashed the compiler. Fixed in 0.3.23.1 already.

-  For Python2, the default encoding for source files is ``ascii``, and
   it is now enforced by Nuitka as well, with the same ``SyntaxError``.

-  Corner cases of ``exec`` statements with nested functions now give
   proper ``SyntaxError`` exceptions under Python2.

-  The ``exec`` statement with a tuple of length 1 as argument, now also
   gives a ``TypeError`` exception under Python2.

-  For Python2, the ``del`` of a closure variable is a ``SyntaxError``.

**************
 New Features
**************

-  Added support creating compiled packages. If you give Nuitka a
   directory with an "__init__.py" file, it will compile that package
   into a ".so" file. Adding the package contents with ``--recurse-dir``
   allows to compile complete packages now. Later there will be a
   cleaner interface likely, where the later is automatic.

-  Added support for providing directories as main programs. It's OK if
   they contain a "__main__.py" file, then it's used instead, otherwise
   give compatible error message.

-  Added support for optimizing the ``super`` built-in. It was already
   working correctly, but not optimized on CPython2. But for CPython3,
   the variant without any arguments required dedicated code.

-  Added support for optimizing the ``unicode`` built-in under Python2.
   It was already working, but will become the basis for the ``str``
   built-in of Python3 in future releases.

-  For Python3, lots of compatibility work has been done. The Unicode
   issues appear to be ironed out now. The ``del`` of closure variables
   is allowed and supported now. Built-ins like ``ord`` and ``chr`` work
   more correctly and attributes are now interned strings, so that
   monkey patching classes works.

****************
 Organisational
****************

-  Migrated "bin/benchmark.sh" to Python as "misc/run-valgrind.py" and
   made it a bit more portable that way. Prefers "/var/tmp" if it exists
   and creates temporary files in a secure manner. Triggered by the
   Debian "insecure temp file" bug.

-  Migrated "bin/make-dependency-graph.sh" to Python as
   "misc/make-dependency-graph.py" and made a more portable and powerful
   that way.

   The filtering is done a more robust way. Also it creates temporary
   files in a secure manner, also triggered by the Debian "insecure temp
   file" bug.

   And it creates SVG files and no longer PostScript as the first one is
   more easily rendered these days.

-  Removed the "misc/gist" git sub-module, which was previously used by
   "misc/make-doc.py" to generate HTML from `User Manual
   <https://nuitka.net/doc/user-manual.html>`__ and `Developer Manual
   <https://nuitka.net/doc/developer-manual.html>`__.

   These are now done with Nikola, which is much better at it and it
   integrates with the web site.

-  Lots of formatting improvements to the change log, and manuals:

   -  Marking identifiers with better suited ReStructured Text markup.
   -  Added links to the bug tracker all Issues.
   -  Unified wordings, quotation, across the documents.

**********
 Cleanups
**********

-  The creation of the class dictionaries is now done with normal
   function bodies, that only needed to learn how to throw an exception
   when directly called, instead of returning ``NULL``.

   Also the assignment of ``__module__`` and ``__doc__`` in these has
   become visible in the node tree, allowing their proper optimization.

   These re-formulation changes allowed to remove all sorts of special
   treatment of ``class`` code in the code generation phase, making
   things a lot simpler.

-  There was still a declaration of ``PRINT_ITEMS`` and uses of it, but
   no definition of it.

-  Code generation for "main" module and "other" modules are now merged,
   and no longer special.

-  The use of raw strings was found unnecessary and potentially still
   buggy and has been removed. The dependence on C++11 is getting less
   and less.

***********
 New Tests
***********

-  Updated CPython2.6 test suite "tests/CPython26" to 2.6.8, adding
   tests for recent bug fixes in CPython. No changes to Nuitka were
   needed in order to pass, which is always good news.

-  Added CPython2.7 test suite as "tests/CPython27" from 2.7.3, making
   it public for the first time. Previously a private copy of some age,
   with many no longer needed changes had been used by me. Now it is up
   to par with what was done before for "tests/CPython26", so this
   pending action is finally done.

-  Added test to cover Python2 syntax error of having a function with
   closure variables nested inside a function that is an overflow
   function.

-  Added test "BuiltinSuper" to cover ``super`` usage details.

-  Added test to cover ``del`` on nested scope as syntax error.

-  Added test to cover ``exec`` with a tuple argument of length 1.

-  Added test to cover ``barry_as_FLUFL`` future import to work.

-  Removed "Unicode" from known error cases for CPython3.2, it's now
   working.

*********
 Summary
*********

This release brought forward the most important remaining re-formulation
changes needed for Nuitka. Removing class bodies, makes optimization yet
again simpler. Still, making function references, so they can be copied,
is missing for value propagation to progress.

Generally, as usual, a focus has been laid on correctness. This is also
the first time, I am release with a known bug though, one which I
believe now, may be the root cause of the mercurial tests not yet
passing.

The solution will be involved and take a bit of time. It will be about
"compiled frames" and be a (invasive) solution. It likely will make
Nuitka faster too. But this release includes lots of tiny improvements,
for Python3 and also for Python2. So I wanted to get this out now.

As usual, please check it out, and let me know how you fare.
