.. date: 2020-05-19 13:38:11 +0200
.. title: Nuitka and Google Summer of Nuitka
.. slug: gsoc2019

.. contents::

Google Summer of Code 2019
==========================

Nuitka team is happy to see your interest in helping out by applying
for `Google Summer of Code 2019 <https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/>`__
and helping develop it.

This is the first time Nuitka project participates, and we are excited
to be joined by the students in this. We are experienced coders and have
mentored during day jobs. And definitely we look forward to having fun
with this.

About Nuitka
============

Nuitka is a project to write a Python compiler in Python. Unlike PyPy, it is
about static compilation, and aims to be less complex, but fully compatible
with gradual degradation of performance, up to C level.

See our `introduction <http://nuitka.net/pages/overview.html>`__ for a full
summary and consider reading the
`user manual <http://nuitka.net/doc/user-manual.html>`__ and the
`developer manual <http://nuitka.net/doc/developer-manual.html>`__ for
further clarification.

What we do
----------

The software created is a compiler that is a drop-in replacement for CPython
and derivatives like Anaconda.

It aims at accelerating Python closer to C level while maintaining the full
compatibility, while also delivering an option for deployment of applications
in a standalone fashion.

Why is it interesting?
----------------------

Python is used in a lot of places, but when it comes to performance, other
languages are used, have to be used. Nuitka aims at changing it. Making Python
even more of a choice for high performance computing will make us famous, rich,
or loved. Maybe even all of that.

Who uses it?
------------

Nuitka already has a lot of users. Many of these are most interested in the
packaging side, but also some care about even tiny performance improvements,
like the roughly 2x-3x speed up achieved in most cases.

What languages is it written in?
--------------------------------

Nuitka is written in Python. It has a C run time, that for some ideas you
would have to touch, for some you absolutely do not. There is a lot to be
done in pure Python, esp. static optimization.

How is it going to change the world?
------------------------------------

Being able to write C speed code in a language as simple as Python. What else
to say. This is taking Python where it currently cannot be.

Contacting Nuitka
=================

For the purpose of GSoC the Nuitka development mailing list (since closed) can
be used, as well as private email. We will be reachable via Hangout/Duo calls
on a regular basis.

We will be able to accommodate all time zones somehow.

Getting Started
===============

Nuitka setup is trivial and explained in the
`User Manual <http://nuitka.net/doc/user-manual.html>`_. Using
Anaconda Python on Windows, or a normal Linux system, and you are good to go
with a git clone of Nuitka in a minute. See `Download page <http://nuitka.net/pages/download.html>`_
how to do that.

Bug fixes and features are expected to be done via PRs on Github. We can guide
you through that, it's easy. We are not very formal, but helpful.

Remember, Nuitka must be the title of your application or else Google will
not know what it is about.

Mentors
=======

* Kay Hayen <kay.hayen@gmail.com>, creator of Nuitka
* Kamran Ghanaat <kamran.ghanaat@uni-oldenburg.de>, seasoned all around user
* Jorj X. McKie <jorj.x.mckie@outlook.de>, contributor and creator of
  Nuitka-Utilities repo.
* Vaibhav Tulsyan <vstulsyan@gmail.com>, expert mentor and Pythonista

Ideas
=====

1. Nuitka support for PyPI top 50
---------------------------------

Project description: Nuitka works with most software. The aim of this project
is to make sure it's true for the top 50 packages on PyPI, by compiling and
using their example codes.

So, first of all, we need to define what we mean by top 50 PyPI packages. For
Python downloading the packages via pip is very widespread. So the first task
would be to look at the top 100 and identify 50 packages that are even
relevant to Nuitka.
There is a list of `Top 100 PyPI <https://hugovk.github.io/top-pypi-packages/>`__.

Of course pip itself, leading the list, we will skip that, nobody needs that
compiled or uses it as a library in their software. But `urllib3` is currently
top 2, and a very important piece of software that people rely on, so breaking
it in Nuitka compilation would be bad.

What the student would be expected to do, is to go and read its documentation
in search for a tutorial, small examples, that make it work. Distill a minimal
test out of that and add it to the existing pool of tests in
`tests/standalone <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/tree/develop/tests/standalone>`__
say as `tests/standalone/Urllib3Using.py` and get it to work in standalone mode,
using the Nuitka argument ``--standalone``.

Then, if possible and easy enough, the tests should be made to work. For hard
cases, where the tests are difficult to get to work, we can skip them. For
the widespread ``py.test`` and ``nose2`` there is a very good chance to get
them working against a compiled package. For that you would be using the
Nuitka argument ``--package``, throw in magic environment variables if necessary
(this secret will be revealed, eh documented in the course of our work), if the
tests live below the package name space, say urllib3.tests and then run the
tests.

Looking at the test results, which hopefully pass and fail equally well (pro
tip, never assume a released software passes all the tests when not compiled
in your environment or any), you then try to identify the issue, or report it
as a Nuitka issue, or sometimes as an issue of the software we are testing.

When those work, we should try and turn this into a re-usable test as well,
so we can apply them in an automated fashion.

Then on to next package on the list. The main benefit to the student will be
to get to know the 50 most important software packages of Python on at least
a cursory level. Something the mentors won't even do. And that will teach you
a lot and the mentors too. And it will prevent people using Nuitka from then
encountering things that our testing will then find before our releases.

In a first stage, you would identify and report the issues to the bug tracker,
in a second stage develop tools that help to narrow down issues, e.g. what
extension module fails to load precisely, even with a segfault happening,
and put them to use and try to fix a few of the simpler issues.

Setting up these as automated tests would be the ultimate goal, so we can
follow these top 50 packages with Nuitka over time and make sure they continue
to work. We can definitely help with that part though, the student may or
may not have the ability to do that part himself, would be OK.

In the past it has happened e.g. that Jinja2 was breaking for Python 3.7, and
it would be cool to discover this immediately.

Skills: Python programming, pip installation, virtualenv. Also need a Linux
and/or Windows installs of Python, one platform is good, both would be great.
Ideally learn about ``pipenv`` and apply it for defining environments to
test in.

Main platform for this would be the `Github issue <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/issues/229>`__
and feel to ask questions and clarifications there.


Difficulty level: *Easy*

Potential mentors: Vaibhav Tulsyan, Kay Hayen, Kamran Ghanaat, Jorj X. McKie

2. Nuitka one file standalone option
------------------------------------

Project description: Nuitka has a mode meant for distribution to another system
that puts everything needed in a single folder with a ``.dist`` suffix. This
folder is then essentially the distribution.

One complaint often raised about that solution is that it's a folder rather
than a single file, for alternative packaging methods, e.g. ``py2exe`` and
``pyinstaller``, these do actually exist, and this project would be about
integrating with that.

In a first stage, the student would identify the code of these tools that is
doing it subsequently and try to port it to Nuitka for one or more platforms.

The main job here to analyse the competing projects code and to transfer the
ability to Nuitka.

Skills: Python programming, having Linux and/or Windows installs of
Python, both would be great. Likely some C knowledge may be required, but
that is uncertain.

Main platform for this would be the `Github issue <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/issues/230>`__
and feel to ask questions and clarifications there.


Difficulty level: *Easy*

Potential mentors: Jorj X. McKie, Kay Hayen, Kamran Ghanaat

3. Nuitka benchmarks
--------------------

Project description: Nuitka has too little in the way of measuring the actual
performance gains one has. You would change that.

In a first stage, you would enhance the existing
`speedcenter <http://speedcenter.nuitka.net>`__ to provide a more
complete set of micro-benchmarks, for the different levels of optimization,
with more or less type knowledge. You would then as a second step add a history
of commits in some form of graphs that extend over a longer perioud of time,
and automatically identify changes that e.g. produce equivalent C code.

As Nuitka is both about high level compile time optimization as well as
low level runtime optimization, your task would be to enhance coverage
and to make the information used to input decision making for Nuitka
optimization more readable.

But also users should get a better grasp of what can be expected to be
accelerated and what not, and by how much. The student will be relatively
free in inventing ways to present this information.

Skills: Python programming, Linux installs of Python, C tooling would be nice,
but can be mentored.

Main platform for this would be the `Github issue <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/issues/231>`__
and feel to ask questions and clarifications there.


Difficulty level: *Intermediate*

Potential mentors: Kay Hayen, Vaibhav Tulsyan, Kamran Ghanaat, Jorj X. McKie

4. Nuitka all built-ins
-----------------------

Project description: Nuitka has support for many built-ins, e.g. ``len`` already,
which means dedicated C code, compile time evaluation, type shapes produced (in
this case an ``int``), but there are some notable exceptions, e.g. ``enumerate``
where we know types too, that are still missing, but definitely can have high
performance impact on some loops. Not having that means that ``enumerate``
using loops are losing out on many optimization opportunities.

The students task would be to imitate existing built-in codes to achieve a
complete support for ultimately all C built-ins. The first step would be to
identify which ones are missing (by means of a warning added), then to find out
in test runs of the test suites, which ones are warned about, and to resolve as
many of those as possible. It is assumed that achieving this for all built-ins
can be done with your help.

This would be great getting your feet wet with optimization in Nuitka and one
that has actual impact, as well as seeing many corner cases of built-ins in
Python that will the student will become knowledgable of.

Further reading:

* `Nuitka len node code <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/blob/cb0e0beb72041adeab1065306d5413a6bd868611/nuitka/nodes/BuiltinLenNodes.py#L52>`__

* Runtime C code example:

  .. code-block:: C

   PyObject *BUILTIN_LEN(PyObject *value) {
       CHECK_OBJECT(value);

       Py_ssize_t res = PyObject_Size(value);

       if (unlikely(res < 0 && ERROR_OCCURRED())) {
           return NULL;
       }

       return PyInt_FromSsize_t(res);
   }

* Many more links and examples in the Github issue below.

Skills: Python and C programming, platform wouldn't matter

Main platform for this would be the `Github issue <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/issues/232>`__
and feel to ask questions and clarifications there.

Difficulty level: *Intermediate*

Potential mentors: Kay Hayen, Vaibhav Tulsyan, Kamran Ghanaat, Jorj X. McKie


5. Nuitka macOS CI
------------------

Project description: Nuitka has currently no CI for macOS, which means it
can be broken in any release.

Your task would be to enhance the Travis configuration to introduce that the
tests are run on macOS too. Ideally you would also manage to get Anaconda on
that platform used, but that is not expected.

Your mentors will not be able to help with macOS specifics. Nuitka is known
to work on the platform, but Travis might expose differences that need some
addressing.

Main platform for this would be the `Github issue <https://github.com/Nuitka/Nuitka/issues/233>`__
and feel to ask questions and clarifications there.

Skills: Travis, have macOS platform, XCode tooling

Difficulty level: *Hard*

.. note::

   This idea has been retracted due to lack of interest from
   students and due to higher than expected interest in ideas
   that are more valuable.


Timeline
========

This is time line as relevant for the students:

* February 26 - organizations announced (PSF is going to be part of it)
* Up to March 20 students discuss applications with mentoring organizations
* March 25 - April 9th Student application period
* May 6 Accepted student proposals announced
* May 6 - May 27 community bonding
* May 27 - Aug 26 coding
* August September 3 results announced
