This is to inform you about the new stable release of `Nuitka <http://nuitka.net>`_. It is the extremely compatible Python compiler. Please see the page `"What is Nuitka?" </pages/overview.html>`_ for an overview.

This is about the new release with focus on performance and cleanups. It
indicates significant progress with the milestone this release series really is
about as it adds a ``compiled_method`` type.

So far functions, generator function, generator expressions were compiled
objects, but in the context of classes, functions were wrapped in CPython
``instancemethod`` objects. The new ``compiled_method`` is specifically designed
for wrapping ``compiled_function`` and therefore more efficient at it.

Bug fixes
---------

- When using ``Python`` or ``Nuitka.py`` to execute some script, the exit code
  in case of "file not found" was not the same as CPython. It should be 2,
  not 1.

- The exit code of the created programs (``--deep`` mode) in case of an uncaught
  exception was 0, now it an error exit with value 1, like CPython does it.

- Exception tracebacks created inside ``with`` statements could contain
  duplicate lines, this was corrected.

New Optimization
----------------

- Global variable assignments now also use ``assign0`` where no reference
  exists.

  The assignment code for module variables is actually faster if it needs not
  drop the reference, but clearly the code shouldn't bother to take it on the
  outside just for that. This variant existed, but wasn't used as much so far.

- The instance method objects are now Nuitka's own compiled type too. This
  should make things slightly faster by itself.

- Our new compiled method objects support dedicated method parsing code, where
  ``self`` is passed directly, allowing to make calls taking a fast path in
  parameter parsing.

  This avoids allocating/freeing a ``tuple`` object per method call, while
  reduced 3% ticks in "PyStone" benchmark, so that's significant.

- Solved a ``TODO`` of ``BUILTIN_RANGE`` to change it to pre-allocating the list
  in the final size as we normally do everywhere else. This was a tick reduction
  of 0.4% in "PyStone" benchmark, but the measurement method normalizes on loop
  speed, so it's not visible in the numbers output.

- Parameter variables cannot possibly be uninitialized at creation and most
  often they are never subject to a ``del`` statement. Adding dedicated C++
  variable classes gave a big speedup, around 3% of "PyStone" benchmark ticks.

- Some abstract object operations were re-implemented, which allows to avoid
  function calls e.g. in the ``ITERATOR_NEXT`` case, this gave a few percent on
  "PyStone" as well.

Cleanups
--------

- New package ``nuitka.codegen`` to contain all code generation related stuff,
  moved ``nuitka.templates`` to ``nuitka.codegen.templates`` as part of that.

- Inside the ``nuitka.codegen`` package the ``MainControl`` module now longer
  reaches into ``Generator`` for simple things, but goes through
  ``CodeGeneration`` for everything now.

- The ``Generator`` module uses almost no tree nodes anymore, but instead gets
  information passed in function calls. This allows for a cleanup of the
  interface towards ``CodeGeneration``. Gives a cleaner view on the C++ code
  generation, and generally furthers the goal of other than C++ language
  backends.

- More "PyLint" work, many of the reported warnings have been addressed, but
  it's not yet happy.

- Defaults for ``yield`` and ``return`` are ``None`` and these values are now
  already added (as constants) during tree building so that no such special
  cases need to be dealt with in ``CodeGeneration`` and future analysis steps.

- Parameter parsing code has been unified even further, now the whole entry
  point is generated by one of the function in the new
  ``nuitka.codegen.ParameterParsing`` module.

- Split variable, exception, built-in helper classes into separate header files.

New Tests
---------

- The exit codes of CPython execution and Nuitka compiled programs are now
  compared as well.

- Errors messages of methods are now covered by the ``ParameterErrors`` test as
  well.

Organizational
--------------

- A new script "benchmark.sh" (now called "run-valgrind.py") script now starts
  "kcachegrind" to display the valgrind result directly.

  One can now use it to execute a test and inspect valgrind information right
  away, then improve it. Very useful to discover methods for improvements, test
  them, then refine some more.

- The "check-release.sh" script needs to unset ``NUITKA_EXTRA_OPTIONS`` or else
  the reflection test will trip over the changed output paths.

Numbers
-------

python 2.6::

  Pystone(1.1) time for 50000 passes = 0.65
  This machine benchmarks at 76923.1 pystones/second

Nuitka 0.3.7 (driven by python 2.6)::

  Pystone(1.1) time for 50000 passes = 0.28
  This machine benchmarks at 178571 pystones/second

This is a 132% speed of 0.3.7 compared to CPython, up from 109% compare to the
previous release. This is a another small increase, that can be fully attributed
to milestone 2 measures, i.e. not analysis, but purely more efficient C++ code
generation and the new compiled method type.

One can now safely assume that it is at least twice as fast, but I will try and
get the PyPy or Shedskin test suite to run as benchmarks to prove it.

No milestone 3 work in this release. I believe it's best to finish with
milestone 2 first, because these are quite universal gains that we should have
covered.
