.. post:: 2018/07/27 07:08:54
   :tags: Python, compiler, Nuitka, NTW
   :author: Kay Hayen

#####################
 Nuitka this week #1
#####################

.. contents::

**********************
 New Series Rationale
**********************

I think I tend to prefer coding over communication too much. I think I
need to make more transparent what I am doing. Also things, will be
getting exciting continuously for a while now.

I used to status report posts, many years ago, every 3 months or so, and
that was nice for me also to get an idea of what changed, but I stopped.
What did not happen, was to successfully engage other people to
contribute.

This time I am getting more intense. I will aim to do roughly weekly or
bi-weekly reports, where I highlight things that are going on, newly
found issues, hotfixes, all the things Nuitka.

**************
 Planned Mode
**************

I will do it this fashion. I will write a post to the mailing list,
right about wednesday every week or so. I need to pick a day. I am
working from home that day, saving me commute time. I will invest that
time into this.

The writing will not be too high quality at times. Bare with me there.
Then I will check feedback from the list, if any. Hope is for it to
point out the things where I am not correct, missing, or even engage
right away.

Topics are going to be random, albeit repeating. I will try and make
links to previous issues where applicable. Therefore also the TOC, which
makes for link targets in the pages.

*************
 Locals Dict
*************

When I am speaking of locals dict, I am talking of class scopes (and
functions with ``exec`` statements). These started to use actual
dictionary a while ago, which was a severe setback to optimization.

Right now, so for this week, after a first prototype was making the
replacement of local dict assignment and references for Python2, and
kind of worked through my buildbots, flawlessly, I immediately noticed
that it would require some refactoring to not depend on the locals
scopes to be only in one of the trace collections. Thinking of future
inlining, maybe part of a locals scope was going to be in multiple
functions, that ought to not be affected.

Therefore I made a global registry of locals scopes, and working on
those, I checked its variables, if they can be forward propagated, and
do this not per module, but after all the modules have been done. This
is kind of a setback for the idea of module specific optimization
(cacheable later on) vs. program optimization, but since that is not yet
a thing, it can remain this way for now.

Once I did that, I was interested to see the effect, but to my horror, I
noticed, that memory was not released for the locals dict nodes. It was
way too involved with cyclic dependencies, which are bad. So that was
problematic of course. Compilation to keep nodes in memory for both
tracing the usage as a locals dict and temporary variables, wasn't going
to help scaling at all.

Solution is finalization

*************************
 Nodes need Finalization
*************************

So replaced nodes reference a parent, and then the locals scope
references variables, and trace collections referencing variables, which
reference locals scopes, and accesses referencing traces, and so on. The
garbage collector can handle some of this, but seems I was getting past
that.

For a solution, I started to add a finalize method, which released the
links for locals scopes, when they are fully propagated, on the next
run.

Adding a finalize to all nodes, ought to make sure, memory is released
soon, and might even find bugs, as nodes become unusable after they are
supposedly unused. Obviously, there will currently be cases, where nodes
becomes unused, but they are not finalized yet. Also, often this is more
manual, because part of the node is to be released, but one child is
re-used. That is messy.

************************
 Impact on Memory Usage
************************

The result was a bit disappointing. Yes, memory usage of mercurial
compilation went back again, but mostly to what it had been. Some
classes are now having their locals dict forward propagated, but the
effect is not always a single dictionary making yet. Right now, function
definitions, are not forward at all propagated. This is a task I want to
take on before next release though, but maybe not, there is other things
too. But I am assuming that will make most class dictionaries created
without using any variables at all anymore, which should make it really
lean.

*********************
 Type Hints Question
*********************

Then, asking about type hints, I got the usual question about Nuitka
going to use it. And my stance is unchanged. They are just hints, not
reliable. Need to behave the same if users do it wrong. Suggested to
create decorated which make type hints enforced. But I expect nobody
takes this on though. I need to make it a Github issue of Nuitka,
although technically it is pure CPython work and ought to be done
independently. Right now Nuitka is not yet there anyway yet, to take
full advantage.

************
 Python 3.7
************

Then, for Python 3.7, I have long gotten the 3.6 test suite to pass. I
raised 2 bugs with CPython, one of which lead to update of a failing
test. Nuitka had with large delay, caught of with what ``del
__annotations__`` was doing in a class. Only with the recent work for
proper locals dict code generation, we could enforce a name to be local,
and have proper code generation, that allows for it to be unset.

This was of course a bit of work. But the optimization behind was always
kind of necessary to get right. But now, that I got this, think of my
amazement when for 3.7 they reverted to the old behavior, where
annotiatons then corrupt the module annotations

The other bug is a reference counting bug, where Nuitka tests were
failing with CPython 3.7, and turns out, there is a bug in the
dictionary implementation of 3.7, but it only corrupts counts reported,
not actual objects, so it's harmless, but means for 3.7.0 the reference
count tests are disabled.

Working through the 3.7 suite, I am cherry picking commits, that e.g.
allow the ``repr`` of compiled functions to contain ``<compiled_function
...>`` and the like. Nothing huge yet. There is now a subscript of type,
and foremost the async syntax became way more liberal, so it is more
complex for Nuitka to make out if it is a coroutine due to something
happening inside a generator declared inside of it. Also ``cr_origin``
was added to coroutines, but that is mostly it.

*************************
 Coroutine Compatibility
*************************

A bigger thing was that I debugged coroutines and their interaction with
uncompiled and compiled coroutines awaiting one another, and turns out,
there was a lot to improve.

The next release will be much better compatible with ``asyncio`` module
and its futures, esp with exceptions to cancel tasks passed along. That
required to clone a lot of CPython generator code, due to how ugly they
mess with bytecode instruction pointers in ``yield from`` on an
uncompiled coroutine, as they don't work with ``send`` method unlike
everything else has to.

*****************
 PyLint Troubles
*****************

For PyLint, the 2.0.0 release found new things, but unfortunately for
2.0.1 there is a lot of regressions that I had to report. I fixed the
versions of first PyLint, and now also Astroid, so Travis cannot
suddenly start to fail due to a PyLint release finding new warnings.

Currently, if you make a PR on Github, a PyLint update will break it.
And also the cron job on Travis that checks master.

As somebody pointed out, I am now using `requires.io
<https://requires.io/github/kayhayen/Nuitka/requirements/?branch=factory>`
to check for Nuitka dependencies. But since 1.9.2 is still needed for
Python2, that kind of is bound to give alarms for now.

**************
 TODO solving
**************

I have a habit of doing off tasks, when I am with my notebook in some
place, and don't know what to work on. So I have some 2 hours recently
like this, and used it to look at ``TODO`` and resolve them.

I did a bunch of cleanups for static code helpers. There was one in my
mind about calling a function with a single argument. That fast call
required a local array with one element to put the arg into. That makes
using code ugly.

********************
 Issues Encountered
********************

So the ``enum`` module of Python3 hates compiled classes and their
``staticmethod`` around ``__new__``. Since it manually unwraps
``__new__`` and then calls it itself, it then finds that a
``staticmethod`` object cannot be called. It's purpose is to sit in the
class dictionary to give a descriptor that removes the ``self`` arg from
the call.

I am contemplating submitting an upstream patch for CPython here. The
hard coded check for ``PyFunction`` on the ``__new__`` value is hard to
emulate.

So I am putting the ``staticmethod`` into the dictionary passed already.
But the undecorated function should be there for full compatibility.

If I were to make compiled function type that is both a staticmethod
alike and a function, maybe I can work around it. But it's ugly and a
burden. But it would need no change. And maybe there is more core
wanting to call ``__new__`` manually

*******
 Plans
*******

I intend to make a release, probably this weekend. It might not contain
full 3.7 compatibility yet, although I am aiming at that.

Then I want to turn to "goto generators", a scalability improvement of
generators and coroutines that I will talk about next week then.

Until next week.
