.. post:: 2018/12/10 07:09:00
   :tags: Python, compiler, Nuitka, NTW
   :author: Kay Hayen

######################
 Nuitka this week #11
######################

.. contents::

**************************
 Communication vs. Coding
**************************

I continue to force myself to report more publicly, and it feels good.
This time things are in a stablizing period, and I feel I have a
consistent message.

Bear in mind, that this is supposed to be a quick, not too polished, and
straight from top of my head, even if really a lot of content. But I
feel that esp. the optimization parts are worth reading.

*******************
 Optimization Work
*******************

So, the 0.6.1 optimization work has been a lot. And it's containing
improvements on every level. I think I will detail the levels in another
section.

Levels of Optimization
======================

First level is of course node level optimization. Here 0.6.1 adds many
things, from better handling of closure variables not all as unknown
every time control flow escapes, to some operations ``+`` and
comparisons on known built-in type shapes to now be able to statically
tell that they do not raise. The opposite (does definitely raise) is
prepared, but not yet used.

This allows for type shapes to be longer known. Now ``a+b+c`` can be
known, but previously only ``a+b`` was sort of known, and little used
information.

The next level is picking the C target type. Here seeing more operations
and understanding more variables allows to more often pick the `C bool`
or `C void` types over the `PyObject *` C type. For 0.6.1 I have
observed that esp. more indicator variables make it to that stage,
generating way more efficient C code (for that indicator variable) for
those in many instances, esp. with loops, as these no longer loose type
shape information as badly as they did.

The, another level is when it is treated as an object, but known to be
`int`, there are way more helpers used for `+`/`+=` and a whole new set
of them for comparisons, that in these cases of full or partial type
knowledge operate faster.

And even if e.g. only one type is known, this still allows to not make a
lot of tests about it, and to avoid attempted shortcuts that cannot
work. For 0.6.1 the `+` and `+=` are pretty well covered for these, but
some variants are not yet tuned to take all type knowledge advantage.

These will be also the building block, once the C type layer picks types
like "C int or PyObject * known to be int" with indicator flags which
values are currently valid to use, then these specialized calls still
make sense.

The most attrative level, "C int" has not been reached for 0.6.1 but for
my loop example and Python3, I can say that now would be a nice time to
start it, as type shape knowledge is all there. This was totally not the
case for 0.6.0, but it seems that this step will have to be postponed to
another release, maybe 0.6.2, maybe even later.

*******************
 Week of Bugfixing
*******************

But something that bothers me is seeing the issue tracker pile up on
actionable items, where I just have not taken action. So as announced on
Twitter already, I am having and continue to have bug fixing time. I am
acting on issues that are relatively old and easy to act on, or where I
have no hope of this happening by anybody else anymore.

I have listed some interesting examples below. But basically these are
small, relatively unimportant, yet somewhat import for some use cases
things.

*********************
 Exec on Filehandles
*********************

So when doing exec on a filehandle, Nuitka was at runtime reading the
source, then compiling it, but forgetting about the filename. This makes
things like `inspect.getsource()` fail on functions from there, and ugly
tracebacks not pointing to the filename. This was one of the things
which I had understood, but not did the actual work yet.

**********************
 pkgutil.iter_modules
**********************

And another one, which seemed just not done, but turned out to be rather
complex, this one needs to populate a ``sys.path_importer_cache`` for
imported modules, and then to report the child modules. There was no
object to carry that information, so now instances of the meta path
based importer are associated for every import.

Turns out for Python3, my simplistic type building calling `type`
manually here does not work, as ``__init__`` and ``iter_modules`` do not
become anything but static methods ever. Needs a real type.

Plus, I had to disable it for now, because mixed packages, like the one
we do with ``multiprocessing" where only part is compiled (the one
required) and part is pure Python from disk still, stopped to work. The
``iter_modules`` it seems will have to cover that case too.

So no luck, postponing this until next week of bug fixes. Frustrating a
bit, but such is life.

When to release
===============

There are still some issues that I want to get to. Specicially the
OpenGL plugins which has been research ever since, and nobody stepped
up, but it's rather trivial. And the Tcl/Tk for Windows. People have
provided sufficient instructions for a plugin that I am going to write
this week.

Once I feel the issue tracker is clean, I will release. As a matter of
experience, it is then going to grow a lot again.

**********************************
 Google Summer of Code for Nuitka
**********************************

Finally somebody has stepped up, which means a lot to me. Now to the
actual work!

*********
 Twitter
*********

I continue to be very active there.

`Follow @kayhayen <https://twitter.com/kayhayen?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>`_

And lets not forget, having followers make me happy. So do re-tweets.

Adding Twitter more prominently to the web site is something that is
also going to happen.

*************
 Help Wanted
*************

If you are interested, I am tagging issues `help wanted
<https://github.com/kayhayen/Nuitka/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22>`_
and there is a bunch, and very likely at least one *you* can help with.

Nuitka definitely needs more people to work on it.

***********
 Donations
***********

If you want to help, but cannot spend the time, please consider to
donate to Nuitka, and go here:

`Donate to Nuitka </pages/donations.html>`_
