.. post:: 2013/04/07 13:52:44
   :tags: Python, Nuitka, compiler, Windows
   :author: Kay Hayen

############################################
 Support for portable (standalone) programs
############################################

This post is about a feature often requested, but so far not available
feature of Nuitka. Please see the page `"What is Nuitka?"
</pages/overview.html>`_ for clarification of what it is now and what it
wants to be.

In forums, and in Google, people are looking at a Python compiler, also
as a way of deployment. It should offer what `py2exe
<http://www.py2exe.org/>`_ does, allow installation independent of
Python.

Well, for a long time it didn't. But thanks to recent contributions,
it's upcoming for the next release, Nuitka 0.4.3, and it's in the
current pre-releases.

It works by adding ``--portable`` to the command line. So this should
work for you:

.. code:: bash

   nuitka-python --recurse-all --portable your-program.py

Right now, it will create a folder "_python" with DLLs, and
"_python.zip" with standard library modules used along to the
"your-program.exe". Copy these to another machine, without a Python
installation, and it will (should) work. Making that statement fully
true may need refinements, as some DLL dependencies might not be defined
yet.

.. note::

   We may improve it in the future to meld everything into one
   executable for even easier deployment.

You are more than welcome to experiment with it. To do so, download
Nuitka from the `download page </pages/download.html>`_ and give it a
roll.

.. note::

   Of course, Nuitka is not about replacing "py2exe" primarily, it's
   only a side effect of what we do. Our major goal is of course to
   accelerate Python, but surely nobody minds achieving the two things
   at the same time.

And while the post is labeled "Windows", this feature also works for
Linux at least too. It's just that the lack of Python installations on
client systems is far more widespread on this platform.

To me, as this is from a contributor, it's another sign of Nuitka
gaining adoption for real usage. My personal "py2exe" experience is
practically not existing, I have never used it. And I will only merge
the improvements into the Nuitka project as provided by others. My focus
for the time to come is of course the compile time and run time
optimization.
